# In Class Final Reflection

As data science has emerged in recent years, it’s becoming increasingly evident that this field is critical in expanding our understanding of complex human behaviors, and adaptive, economic, and social systems. Sinan Aral stated that revolutions in measurement often lead to future revolutions in science, and it’s clear that data science is leading to a revolution in science because of the vast amounts and types of data that machine learning models are able to process. The advent of data science is revolutionizing science and advancing our knowledge of complex systems by its ability to be applied to all sorts of fields, and its ability to improve the human condition.

Geoff West spoke to the importance of measurement and data in the development of our understanding of the “entire universe around us”. This idea is particularly shown in data science because of its never-ending possible applications. For our data science reflections this year, I looked into a wide array of topics related to the advancement and further applications of data science. In just four assignments, I saw the principles of data science applied to food, music, and architectural planning. For our first reflection, I learned about a new company that has begun to use machine learning algorithms to process plant proteins and molecular structures in order to develop plant-based food replications that can easily replace animal-based food products. Then, I went on to learn how Google Research has applied machine learning to music. They created a process called Differential Digital Signal Processing that can take sounds inputted by a user and transform them into solos played by classical instruments. My research just in these past two months reveals just how important data science is and will be in expanding our understanding in all sorts of different fields and systems. Data science could truly expand our knowledge in every aspect of the world around us.

Along with increasing our knowledge and manipulation of the natural world around us, data science has been advancing the wellbeing of the human condition. When I first thought of data science, my mind immediately went to its applications in medicine and big data. And while researching for my data science reflections, I came across many of its different applications in the medical fields, with most being related to the coronavirus and the current pandemic. In particular, I read about a rapid COVID test created by Oxford that utilizes machine learning and neural networks to quickly differentiate influenza virus particles from coronavirus particles from an unaltered sample taken directly from the patient. As well as improving the human condition in the medical sense, data science has also improved lives in other, less obvious senses. For example, I learned about Delve, a design software developed by Sidewalk Labs that can produce thousands of design possibilities for urban developments based on certain inputted criteria. In its applications, Delve has been able to increase the daylight access, unit size, open spaces, and sun hours of these future developments, thus increasing the quality of life for their future residents. These applications of data science reveal how the field is revolutionizing science and how these revolutions are in turn improving the conditions for human life. 

However, the field of data science is not without its faults, the most notable being its issues with privacy. Data science’s ability to analyze human behaviors and patterns is often hinged on using personal data from consumers. In class we had a discussion on how the platform TikTok uses data from its users to create individualized “for you pages” in order to increase participation and time spent on the app. To create these pages, TikTok uses time and location data collected from the user, but unlike certain apps, the user doesn’t get the option to opt out of this data collection, it just happens. This trend of collecting vast amounts of user data for profit is on rise and it’s only being spurred on by the increasing capabilities of data science, which raises a slew of questions on the ethics of the field. The possible applications and subsequent discoveries from data science might be immense, but they might not be as worthwhile if they cost us our privacy or if they’re only spurred on for the sake of profit. 

The creation of data science has drastically advanced our understanding of complex human and natural systems leading to improvements in the human condition, and these advancements will only be furthered because of the never-ending possibilities for the field. Yet, we must consider the implications of the advancement of data science because it comes at the cost of an individual loss of privacy as more and more data is collected from consumers.
